His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness; but she saw with despair that their little
fund was rapidly decreasing, and that there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort
possessed a mind of an uncommon mould; and her courage rose to support her in her adversity. She
procured plain work; she plaited straw; and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely
sufficient to support life.
Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew worse; her time was more entirely occupied
in attending him; her means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her
arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her; and she knelt by Beaufort's
coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the
poor girl, who committed herself to his care, and after the interment of his friend he conducted her
to Geneva, and placed her under the protection of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline
became his wife.
When my father became a husband and a parent, he found his time so occupied by the duties of his
new situation, that he relinquished many of his public employments, and devoted himself to the
education of his children. Of these I was the eldest, and the destined successor to all his labours and
utility. No creature could have more tender parents than mine. My improvement and health were
their constant care, especially as I remained for several years their only child. But before I continue
my narrative, I must record an incident which took place when I was four years of age.
My father had a sister, whom he tenderly loved, and who had married early in life an Italian
gentleman. Soon after her marriage, she had accompanied her husband into his native country, and
for some years my father had very little communication with her. About the time I mentioned she
died; and a few months afterwards he received a letter from her husband, acquainting him with his
intention of marrying an Italian lady, and requesting my father to take charge of the infant Elizabeth,
the only child of his deceased sister. "It is my wish," he said, "that you should consider her as your
own daughter, and educate her thus. Her mother's fortune is secured to her, the documents of
which I will commit to your keeping. Reflect upon this proposition; and decide whether you would
prefer educating your niece yourself to her being brought up by a stepmother."
My father did not hesitate, and immediately went to Italy, that he might accompany the little
Elizabeth to her future home. I have often heard my mother say, that she was at that time the most
beautiful child she had ever seen, and shewed signs even then of a gentle and affectionate
disposition. These indications, and a desire to bind as closely as possible the ties of domestic love,
determined my mother to consider Elizabeth as my future wife; a design which she never found
reason to repent.
From this time Elizabeth Lavenza became my playfellow, and, as we grew older, my friend. She was
docile and good tempered, yet gay and playful as a summer insect. Although she was lively and
animated, her feelings were strong and deep, and her disposition uncommonly affectionate. No one 
could better enjoy liberty, yet no one could submit with more grace than she did to constraint and
caprice. Her imagination was luxuriant, yet her capability of application was great. Her person was
the image of her mind; her hazel eyes, although as lively as a bird's, possessed an attractive softness.
Her figure was light and airy; and, though capable of enduring great fatigue, she appeared the most
fragile creature in the world. While I admired her understanding and fancy, I loved to tend on her, as
I should on a favourite animal; and I never saw so much grace both of person and mind united to so
little pretension.
Every one adored Elizabeth. If the servants had any request to make, it was always through her
intercession. We were strangers to any species of disunion and dispute; for although there was a
great dissimilitude in our characters, there was an harmony in that very dissimilitude. I was more
calm and philosophical than my companion; yet my temper was not so yielding. My application was
of longer endurance; but it was not so severe whilst it endured. I delighted in investigating the facts
relative to the actual world; she busied herself in following the aërial creations of the poets. The
world was to me a secret, which I desired to discover; to her it was a vacancy, which she sought to
people with imaginations of her own.
My brothers were considerably younger than myself; but I had a friend in one of my schoolfellows,
who compensated for this deficiency. Henry Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva, an
intimate friend of my father. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. I remember, when he was
nine years old, he wrote a fairy tale, which was the delight and amazement of all his companions. His
favourite study consisted in books of chivalry and romance; and when very young, I can remember,
that we used to act plays composed by him out of these favourite books, the principal characters of
which were Orlando, Robin Hood, Amadis, and St. George.
No youth could have passed more happily than mine. My parents were indulgent, and my
companions amiable. Our studies were never forced; and by some means we always had an end
placed in view, which excited us to ardour in the prosecution of them. It was by this method, and
not by emulation, that we were urged to application. Elizabeth was not incited to apply herself to
drawing, that her companions might not outstrip her; but through the desire of pleasing her aunt, by
the representation of some favourite scene done by her own hand. We learned Latin and English,
that we might read the writings in those languages; and so far from study being made odious to us
through punishment, we loved application, and our amusements would have been the labours of
other children. Perhaps we did not read so many books, or learn languages so quickly, as those who
are disciplined according to the ordinary methods; but what we learned was impressed the more
deeply on our memories.
In this description of our domestic circle I include Henry Clerval; for he was constantly with us. He
went to school with me, and generally passed the afternoon at our house: for being an only child,
and destitute of companions at home, his father was well pleased that he should find associates at
our house; and we were never completely happy when Clerval was absent.
I feel pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind,
and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self.
But, in drawing the picture of my early days, I must not omit to record those events which led, by
insensible steps to my after tale of misery: for when I would account to myself for the birth of that
passion, which afterwards ruled my destiny, I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and
almost forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course,
has swept away all my hopes and joys.
Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire therefore, in this narration, to
state those facts which led to my predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years of age, we
all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon: the inclemency of the weather obliged us
to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a volume of the works of
Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate, and the
wonderful facts which he relates, soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to
dawn upon my mind; and, bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. I cannot
help remarking here the many opportunities instructors possess of directing the attention of their
pupils to useful knowledge, which they utterly neglect. My father looked carelessly at the title-page
of my book, and said, "Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it
is sad trash."
If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me, that the principles of
Agrippa had been entirely exploded, and that a modern system of science had been introduced,
which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were
chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical; under such circumstances, I should
certainly have thrown Agrippa aside, and, with my imagination warmed as it was, should probably
have applied myself to the more rational theory of chemistry which has resulted from modern
discoveries. It is even possible, that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse
that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no means assured
me that he was acquainted with its contents; and I continued to read with the greatest avidity.
When I returned home, my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards
of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight;
they appeared to me treasures known to few beside myself; and although I have often wished to
communicate these secret stores of knowledge to my father, yet his indefinite censure of my
favourite Agrippa always withheld me. I disclosed my discoveries to Elizabeth, therefore, under a
promise of strict secrecy; but she did not interest herself in the subject, and I was left by her to
pursue my studies alone.
It may appear very strange, that a disciple of Albertus Magnus should arise in the eighteenth century;
but our family was not scientifical, and I had not attended any of the lectures given at the schools of
Geneva. My dreams were therefore undisturbed by reality; and I entered with the greatest diligence 